kitty-specs/006-mission-collaboration-soft-coordination-contracts/tasks/WP09-documentation-and-version-update.md, before:

---
work_package_id: WP09
title: Documentation and Version Update
lane: "doing"
dependencies: [WP08]
base_branch: 006-mission-collaboration-soft-coordination-contracts-WP08
base_commit: dee0a8d815da6da9407f58baf20e276410f9638b
created_at: '2026-02-15T11:32:26.380650+00:00'
subtasks:
- T048
- T049
- T050
- T051
- T052
phase: Phase 4 - Polish
assignee: ''
agent: "claude-coordinator"
shell_pid: "92983"
review_status: ''
reviewed_by: ''
history:
- timestamp: '2026-02-15T10:35:14Z'
  lane: planned
  agent: system
  shell_pid: ''
  action: Prompt generated via /spec-kitty.tasks
---

# Work Package Prompt: WP09 – Documentation and Version Update

## Review Feedback Status

**Read this first if you are implementing this task!**

- **Has review feedback?**: Check the `review_status` field above. If it says `has_feedback`, scroll to the **Review Feedback** section immediately.
- **Mark as acknowledged**: Update `review_status: acknowledged` when you begin addressing feedback.

---

## Review Feedback

*[This section is empty initially. Reviewers will populate it if the work is returned from review.]*

---

## Objectives & Success Criteria

Update all documentation and version metadata for the collaboration feature:
1. README.md: collaboration section with event types and key exports
2. COMPATIBILITY.md: event field reference, reducer contract, envelope mapping, SaaS-authoritative model
3. CHANGELOG.md: 2.1.0 entry documenting all additions
4. Verify quickstart.md examples work
5. Run full test suite and mypy for package integrity

**Success criteria**:
- All 14 event types documented with field references
- Reducer strict/permissive modes documented
- Canonical envelope mapping documented (aggregate_id, correlation_id rules)
- SaaS-authoritative participation model documented
- All quickstart examples run without error
- Full test suite passes, mypy --strict passes

## Context & Constraints

**Reference documents**:
- Quickstart: `kitty-specs/006-.../quickstart.md`
- API contract: `kitty-specs/006-.../contracts/collaboration-api.md`
- Existing docs pattern: see current README.md and COMPATIBILITY.md

**Prerequisites**: WP08 must be merged (all tests and fixtures passing)

**Implementation command**: `spec-kitty implement WP09 --base WP08`

**Version**: This feature targets 2.1.0. Update `pyproject.toml` version if not already done (from `2.0.0rc1` or `2.0.0` to `2.1.0`).

## Subtasks & Detailed Guidance

### Subtask T048 – Update README.md with collaboration section

- **Purpose**: Add consumer-facing documentation for the collaboration feature.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `README.md` to understand existing structure
  2. Add a `## Collaboration Events` section (after Lifecycle Events section) covering:
     - Overview: N-participant mission collaboration with advisory coordination
     - List of 14 event types grouped by category:
       - Participant Lifecycle: ParticipantInvited, ParticipantJoined, ParticipantLeft, PresenceHeartbeat
       - Drive Intent & Focus: DriveIntentSet, FocusChanged
       - Step Execution: PromptStepExecutionStarted, PromptStepExecutionCompleted
       - Advisory Warnings: ConcurrentDriverWarning, PotentialStepCollisionDetected, WarningAcknowledged
       - Communication: CommentPosted, DecisionCaptured
       - Session: SessionLinked
     - Key exports: `ParticipantIdentity`, `FocusTarget`, `reduce_collaboration_events`
     - Quick example (from quickstart.md — event construction + reducer call)
     - Link to COMPATIBILITY.md for detailed field reference
  3. Keep it concise — detailed field tables go in COMPATIBILITY.md
- **Files**: `README.md`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T049, T050)

### Subtask T049 – Update COMPATIBILITY.md

- **Purpose**: Detailed event field reference and contract documentation for consumers.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `COMPATIBILITY.md` to understand existing structure
  2. Add a `## Collaboration Event Contracts` section covering:

  **a) Event Type Reference Table**:
  | Event Type | Actor Field | Key Fields | Category |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | ParticipantInvited | participant_id | participant_identity, invited_by, mission_id | Lifecycle |
  | ... (all 14) | ... | ... | ... |

  **b) Reducer Contract**:
  - Function signature
  - Strict mode: default, raises UnknownParticipantError for unknown participants
  - Permissive mode: records CollaborationAnomaly for violations
  - Seeded roster: optional `roster` parameter for partial-window reduction
  - Pipeline: filter → sort → dedup → process → assemble

  **c) Envelope Mapping Convention**:
  | Field | Wire Format | Example | Constraint |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | aggregate_id | `"mission/{mission_id}"` | `"mission/M042"` | Type-prefixed (matches lifecycle) |
  | correlation_id | ULID-26 | `str(ULID())` | Exactly 26 chars (ULID format) |

  **d) SaaS-Authoritative Participation Model**:
  - `participant_id` is SaaS-minted, mission-scoped
  - CLI must not invent identities
  - Auth principal binding via `auth_principal_id` on `ParticipantJoinedPayload`
  - Strict mode enforces roster membership for all events

  **e) Advisory Warning Semantics**:
  - No hard locks — warnings are informational
  - Acknowledgement actions: continue, hold, reassign, defer
  - Warning events may be emitted by CLI observers and/or SaaS fallback inference (node_id identifies emitter and source)

- **Files**: `COMPATIBILITY.md`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T048, T050)

### Subtask T050 – Update CHANGELOG.md for 2.1.0

- **Purpose**: Document all changes for the 2.1.0 release.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `CHANGELOG.md` to understand format
  2. Add `## 2.1.0` entry (above existing entries):
     ```markdown
     ## 2.1.0

     ### Added
     - **Collaboration event contracts** (Feature 006):
       - 14 new event type constants and `COLLABORATION_EVENT_TYPES` frozenset
       - 3 identity/target models: `ParticipantIdentity`, `AuthPrincipalBinding`, `FocusTarget`
       - 14 typed payload models for participant lifecycle, drive intent, focus, step execution, advisory warnings, communication, and session linking
       - `ReducedCollaborationState` materialized view with 15 fields
       - `reduce_collaboration_events()` — dual-mode reducer (strict/permissive) with seeded roster support
       - `UnknownParticipantError` for strict mode enforcement
       - `CollaborationAnomaly` for non-fatal issue recording
       - 17 new JSON Schema files for collaboration models
      - 7 conformance payload fixtures (5 valid payloads, 2 invalid payloads)
      - Reducer scenario fixtures for multi-event collaboration timelines
       - Hypothesis property tests for reducer determinism
       - Performance benchmark (10K events in <1s)
     - 36 new exports (total package exports: 104)
     - SaaS-authoritative participation model documentation
     - Canonical envelope mapping convention (aggregate_id, correlation_id)
     ```
  3. If `pyproject.toml` version needs updating to `2.1.0`, do it here
- **Files**: `CHANGELOG.md`, optionally `pyproject.toml`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T048, T049)

### Subtask T051 – Verify quickstart.md examples compile

- **Purpose**: Ensure consumer-facing examples actually work.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read `kitty-specs/006-.../quickstart.md`
  2. For each code example, verify it runs without error:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -c "
     from spec_kitty_events import (
         Event, ParticipantIdentity, ParticipantJoinedPayload,
         PARTICIPANT_JOINED, reduce_collaboration_events,
         UnknownParticipantError, FocusTarget,
     )
     # Test identity construction
     identity = ParticipantIdentity(
         participant_id='p-abc123',
         participant_type='human',
         display_name='Alice',
     )
     # Test payload construction
     payload = ParticipantJoinedPayload(
         participant_id='p-abc123',
         participant_identity=identity,
         mission_id='mission/M042',
     )
     print('Quickstart examples verified successfully')
     "
     ```
  3. Verify reducer examples (empty input, basic reduction)
  4. Verify FocusTarget reverse lookup example
- **Files**: N/A (verification only)
- **Parallel?**: No — depends on WP07 (exports must work)

### Subtask T052 – Run full test suite and mypy verification

- **Purpose**: Final integrity check before feature completion.
- **Steps**:
  1. Run default regression suite (exclude benchmark marker):
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest -x -m "not benchmark" --tb=short
     ```
  2. Run mypy strict:
     ```bash
     mypy --strict src/spec_kitty_events/
     ```
  3. Verify coverage:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest --cov=src/spec_kitty_events --cov-report=term-missing
     ```
  4. Run benchmark marker separately:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest -m benchmark --tb=short
     ```
  5. Expected: default regression suite passes, benchmark suite passes, no mypy errors, coverage >= 98%
  6. If any failures: fix before marking WP09 complete
- **Files**: N/A (verification only)
- **Parallel?**: No — final step

## Test Strategy

- **Quickstart verification**: Manual Python execution of code examples
- **Full suite (default gate)**: `python3.11 -m pytest -x -m "not benchmark"`
- **Benchmark suite (separate gate/manual)**: `python3.11 -m pytest -m benchmark`
- **mypy**: `mypy --strict src/spec_kitty_events/`
- **Coverage**: `python3.11 -m pytest --cov=src/spec_kitty_events`

## Risks & Mitigations

| Risk | Impact | Mitigation |
|------|--------|------------|
| Documentation drift | Event types not matching code | Cross-reference against `COLLABORATION_EVENT_TYPES` in code |
| Version bump conflicts | pyproject.toml merge issue | Check current version before bumping |

## Review Guidance

- Verify all 14 event types are documented in README and COMPATIBILITY
- Verify CHANGELOG lists all 36 new exports
- Verify envelope mapping rules are documented (aggregate_id prefix, correlation_id ULID-26)
- Verify SaaS-authoritative model is clearly explained
- Verify quickstart examples were actually run (not just visual check)
- Verify full test suite passes (check test output)

## Completion

```bash
git add -A && git commit -m "feat(WP09): documentation and version update for collaboration"
spec-kitty agent tasks move-task WP09 --to for_review --note "Ready for review: README, COMPATIBILITY, CHANGELOG updated, quickstart verified, full suite passing"
```

## Activity Log

- 2026-02-15T10:35:14Z – system – lane=planned – Prompt created.
- 2026-02-15T11:32:26Z – claude-coordinator – shell_pid=92983 – lane=doing – Assigned agent via workflow command

Commit message:

chore: Move WP09 to for_review on spec 006 [claude-coordinator]

kitty-specs/006-mission-collaboration-soft-coordination-contracts/tasks/WP09-documentation-and-version-update.md, after:

---
work_package_id: WP09
title: Documentation and Version Update
lane: "for_review"
dependencies: [WP08]
base_branch: 006-mission-collaboration-soft-coordination-contracts-WP08
base_commit: dee0a8d815da6da9407f58baf20e276410f9638b
created_at: '2026-02-15T11:32:26.380650+00:00'
subtasks:
- T048
- T049
- T050
- T051
- T052
phase: Phase 4 - Polish
assignee: ''
agent: "claude-coordinator"
shell_pid: "92983"
review_status: ''
reviewed_by: ''
history:
- timestamp: '2026-02-15T10:35:14Z'
  lane: planned
  agent: system
  shell_pid: ''
  action: Prompt generated via /spec-kitty.tasks
---

# Work Package Prompt: WP09 – Documentation and Version Update

## Review Feedback Status

**Read this first if you are implementing this task!**

- **Has review feedback?**: Check the `review_status` field above. If it says `has_feedback`, scroll to the **Review Feedback** section immediately.
- **Mark as acknowledged**: Update `review_status: acknowledged` when you begin addressing feedback.

---

## Review Feedback

*[This section is empty initially. Reviewers will populate it if the work is returned from review.]*

---

## Objectives & Success Criteria

Update all documentation and version metadata for the collaboration feature:
1. README.md: collaboration section with event types and key exports
2. COMPATIBILITY.md: event field reference, reducer contract, envelope mapping, SaaS-authoritative model
3. CHANGELOG.md: 2.1.0 entry documenting all additions
4. Verify quickstart.md examples work
5. Run full test suite and mypy for package integrity

**Success criteria**:
- All 14 event types documented with field references
- Reducer strict/permissive modes documented
- Canonical envelope mapping documented (aggregate_id, correlation_id rules)
- SaaS-authoritative participation model documented
- All quickstart examples run without error
- Full test suite passes, mypy --strict passes

## Context & Constraints

**Reference documents**:
- Quickstart: `kitty-specs/006-.../quickstart.md`
- API contract: `kitty-specs/006-.../contracts/collaboration-api.md`
- Existing docs pattern: see current README.md and COMPATIBILITY.md

**Prerequisites**: WP08 must be merged (all tests and fixtures passing)

**Implementation command**: `spec-kitty implement WP09 --base WP08`

**Version**: This feature targets 2.1.0. Update `pyproject.toml` version if not already done (from `2.0.0rc1` or `2.0.0` to `2.1.0`).

## Subtasks & Detailed Guidance

### Subtask T048 – Update README.md with collaboration section

- **Purpose**: Add consumer-facing documentation for the collaboration feature.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `README.md` to understand existing structure
  2. Add a `## Collaboration Events` section (after Lifecycle Events section) covering:
     - Overview: N-participant mission collaboration with advisory coordination
     - List of 14 event types grouped by category:
       - Participant Lifecycle: ParticipantInvited, ParticipantJoined, ParticipantLeft, PresenceHeartbeat
       - Drive Intent & Focus: DriveIntentSet, FocusChanged
       - Step Execution: PromptStepExecutionStarted, PromptStepExecutionCompleted
       - Advisory Warnings: ConcurrentDriverWarning, PotentialStepCollisionDetected, WarningAcknowledged
       - Communication: CommentPosted, DecisionCaptured
       - Session: SessionLinked
     - Key exports: `ParticipantIdentity`, `FocusTarget`, `reduce_collaboration_events`
     - Quick example (from quickstart.md — event construction + reducer call)
     - Link to COMPATIBILITY.md for detailed field reference
  3. Keep it concise — detailed field tables go in COMPATIBILITY.md
- **Files**: `README.md`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T049, T050)

### Subtask T049 – Update COMPATIBILITY.md

- **Purpose**: Detailed event field reference and contract documentation for consumers.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `COMPATIBILITY.md` to understand existing structure
  2. Add a `## Collaboration Event Contracts` section covering:

  **a) Event Type Reference Table**:
  | Event Type | Actor Field | Key Fields | Category |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | ParticipantInvited | participant_id | participant_identity, invited_by, mission_id | Lifecycle |
  | ... (all 14) | ... | ... | ... |

  **b) Reducer Contract**:
  - Function signature
  - Strict mode: default, raises UnknownParticipantError for unknown participants
  - Permissive mode: records CollaborationAnomaly for violations
  - Seeded roster: optional `roster` parameter for partial-window reduction
  - Pipeline: filter → sort → dedup → process → assemble

  **c) Envelope Mapping Convention**:
  | Field | Wire Format | Example | Constraint |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | aggregate_id | `"mission/{mission_id}"` | `"mission/M042"` | Type-prefixed (matches lifecycle) |
  | correlation_id | ULID-26 | `str(ULID())` | Exactly 26 chars (ULID format) |

  **d) SaaS-Authoritative Participation Model**:
  - `participant_id` is SaaS-minted, mission-scoped
  - CLI must not invent identities
  - Auth principal binding via `auth_principal_id` on `ParticipantJoinedPayload`
  - Strict mode enforces roster membership for all events

  **e) Advisory Warning Semantics**:
  - No hard locks — warnings are informational
  - Acknowledgement actions: continue, hold, reassign, defer
  - Warning events may be emitted by CLI observers and/or SaaS fallback inference (node_id identifies emitter and source)

- **Files**: `COMPATIBILITY.md`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T048, T050)

### Subtask T050 – Update CHANGELOG.md for 2.1.0

- **Purpose**: Document all changes for the 2.1.0 release.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read current `CHANGELOG.md` to understand format
  2. Add `## 2.1.0` entry (above existing entries):
     ```markdown
     ## 2.1.0

     ### Added
     - **Collaboration event contracts** (Feature 006):
       - 14 new event type constants and `COLLABORATION_EVENT_TYPES` frozenset
       - 3 identity/target models: `ParticipantIdentity`, `AuthPrincipalBinding`, `FocusTarget`
       - 14 typed payload models for participant lifecycle, drive intent, focus, step execution, advisory warnings, communication, and session linking
       - `ReducedCollaborationState` materialized view with 15 fields
       - `reduce_collaboration_events()` — dual-mode reducer (strict/permissive) with seeded roster support
       - `UnknownParticipantError` for strict mode enforcement
       - `CollaborationAnomaly` for non-fatal issue recording
       - 17 new JSON Schema files for collaboration models
      - 7 conformance payload fixtures (5 valid payloads, 2 invalid payloads)
      - Reducer scenario fixtures for multi-event collaboration timelines
       - Hypothesis property tests for reducer determinism
       - Performance benchmark (10K events in <1s)
     - 36 new exports (total package exports: 104)
     - SaaS-authoritative participation model documentation
     - Canonical envelope mapping convention (aggregate_id, correlation_id)
     ```
  3. If `pyproject.toml` version needs updating to `2.1.0`, do it here
- **Files**: `CHANGELOG.md`, optionally `pyproject.toml`
- **Parallel?**: Yes (with T048, T049)

### Subtask T051 – Verify quickstart.md examples compile

- **Purpose**: Ensure consumer-facing examples actually work.
- **Steps**:
  1. Read `kitty-specs/006-.../quickstart.md`
  2. For each code example, verify it runs without error:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -c "
     from spec_kitty_events import (
         Event, ParticipantIdentity, ParticipantJoinedPayload,
         PARTICIPANT_JOINED, reduce_collaboration_events,
         UnknownParticipantError, FocusTarget,
     )
     # Test identity construction
     identity = ParticipantIdentity(
         participant_id='p-abc123',
         participant_type='human',
         display_name='Alice',
     )
     # Test payload construction
     payload = ParticipantJoinedPayload(
         participant_id='p-abc123',
         participant_identity=identity,
         mission_id='mission/M042',
     )
     print('Quickstart examples verified successfully')
     "
     ```
  3. Verify reducer examples (empty input, basic reduction)
  4. Verify FocusTarget reverse lookup example
- **Files**: N/A (verification only)
- **Parallel?**: No — depends on WP07 (exports must work)

### Subtask T052 – Run full test suite and mypy verification

- **Purpose**: Final integrity check before feature completion.
- **Steps**:
  1. Run default regression suite (exclude benchmark marker):
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest -x -m "not benchmark" --tb=short
     ```
  2. Run mypy strict:
     ```bash
     mypy --strict src/spec_kitty_events/
     ```
  3. Verify coverage:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest --cov=src/spec_kitty_events --cov-report=term-missing
     ```
  4. Run benchmark marker separately:
     ```bash
     python3.11 -m pytest -m benchmark --tb=short
     ```
  5. Expected: default regression suite passes, benchmark suite passes, no mypy errors, coverage >= 98%
  6. If any failures: fix before marking WP09 complete
- **Files**: N/A (verification only)
- **Parallel?**: No — final step

## Test Strategy

- **Quickstart verification**: Manual Python execution of code examples
- **Full suite (default gate)**: `python3.11 -m pytest -x -m "not benchmark"`
- **Benchmark suite (separate gate/manual)**: `python3.11 -m pytest -m benchmark`
- **mypy**: `mypy --strict src/spec_kitty_events/`
- **Coverage**: `python3.11 -m pytest --cov=src/spec_kitty_events`

## Risks & Mitigations

| Risk | Impact | Mitigation |
|------|--------|------------|
| Documentation drift | Event types not matching code | Cross-reference against `COLLABORATION_EVENT_TYPES` in code |
| Version bump conflicts | pyproject.toml merge issue | Check current version before bumping |

## Review Guidance

- Verify all 14 event types are documented in README and COMPATIBILITY
- Verify CHANGELOG lists all 36 new exports
- Verify envelope mapping rules are documented (aggregate_id prefix, correlation_id ULID-26)
- Verify SaaS-authoritative model is clearly explained
- Verify quickstart examples were actually run (not just visual check)
- Verify full test suite passes (check test output)

## Completion

```bash
git add -A && git commit -m "feat(WP09): documentation and version update for collaboration"
spec-kitty agent tasks move-task WP09 --to for_review --note "Ready for review: README, COMPATIBILITY, CHANGELOG updated, quickstart verified, full suite passing"
```

## Activity Log

- 2026-02-15T10:35:14Z – system – lane=planned – Prompt created.
- 2026-02-15T11:32:26Z – claude-coordinator – shell_pid=92983 – lane=doing – Assigned agent via workflow command
- 2026-02-15T11:38:34Z – claude-coordinator – shell_pid=92983 – lane=for_review – Ready for review: README, COMPATIBILITY, CHANGELOG updated, version bumped to 2.1.0, quickstart verified, 789 tests passing, mypy clean
